This document describes the use and purpose of the Organization portion of the GEOSS system from the curator perspectives.   


An "Organization Curator" acts as the administrator to all relevant data
pertaining to their associated organization. They will be in charge of adding
and removing users as well as authorizing orders which are placed under the
ownership of that organization.


Organization Curator Guide Table of Contents:


1.0 Organization Home: The Curator's Administration Tool
	
	1.1 Approve Orders

	1.2 View Reports

	1.3 Edit Organization Members

	1.4 Edit Organization Information

	1.5 Upload logo/icon file




Organization Curator Guide: Contents

1.0 Organization Home: The Curator's Administration Tool

Administration tools are available to each organization curator via their
"Org Home" page. When a user who is a curator of a particular organization
logs in they will be taken to their Org Home page. They will also be provided 
with a link to their Org Home which can be found in the page header. If they 
are curators of more than one organization then each link on the Org Home page 
will allow them to choose which organization they are administering at that moment.  
Back to TOC 

	1.1 Approve Orders
	
	The approve orders link allows a curator to see a list of all orders
	which are currently assigned to their organization. This list includes
	orders awaiting approval as well as those recently approved. Future
	system enhancements will include an archive of older approved orders.
	Once approved the orders are marked as complete and ready for
	processing by the array lab.  
	Back to TOC

	1.2 View Reports
	
	Organization Curators can see reports for each organization of which
	they are a curator. The following fields can be seen on the
	organization report:
		
		Order Number: An order number is assigned to a user by the
		array lab upon request. This order number links the samples to
		a particular study and set of experimental conditions.  

		Is Approved: This column provides the date in which the order
		was approved and also notes if it has not been approved yet.  

		Approval Comments: The organization curator can choose to list
		comments when approving orders. These comments are posted
		here.
	
		Order Status: The status of an existing order is displayed in this field and
		can be set to Incomplete, Complete, Submitted, Approved and
		Finished.  

		Study: The name of the study under which the order was placed. 

		Study Comments: Any comments that were entered at the time the
		study was created.  

		PI Name: The name of the PI on the project, or person who owns
		the data.

	The report can be sorted on any of the columns listed.
 
	 	
	1.3 Edit Organization Members

	This link allows the organization curator to add and remove members
	from their organization. The curator can also specify the role of the
	member: user or curator.  

	1.4 Edit Organization Information

	The organization curator can use this link to modify the specifics of
	their organization. The following items are configurable:

		Organization Name: This field is set by the Admin when he/she
		initially creates the organization and can only be edited by
		the administrator.

		Organization Description: This describes the curator's
		organization. It can be seen under the admin's "view
		all organizations link.

		Organization Phone Number: The contact number for the
		organization.

		Billing Discount(%): Enter here the amount that the array
		center should discount billing on orders based on their
		agreement with the organization.

		Organization URL: This field displays the URL to to the
		organization's web site. It is used when the organization has
		a logo displayed on the main GEOSS page. The logo will link to
		this URL.	 

		Organization Logo: This drop down lists the possible logos
		that can be used by the organization on the main GEOSS web
		page. It represents any logos that have been uploaded by the
		organization curator (see 1.5 of this document).

		Organization Icon: This feature is not yet functioning on
		GEOSS.  	 
		 
		Orders Require Approval Before Array Center Processing: If
		this box is checked all completed orders that are submitted
		will be sent to the organization curator for approval before
		being sent to the array center for processing.

		  
	1.5 Upload logo/icon file

	Graphic images can be uploaded to be used as a logo on the main GEOSS web page.
	The logo will be placed in the magenta colored bar on the left of the
	screen to show support for the organization. The logo will link to the
	Organization web site if provided in the "Organization URL" field on
	this configuration page. 
	The icon feature has not yet been implemented.
