1
GEOSS (Gene Expression Open Source System) is a system for the storage
and analysis of microarray data.  GEOSS provides a variety of functions:
  - is a repository for gene chip data
  - used by the array lab at the University of Virginia to manage
    ordering, processing, and billing of gene chips 
  - used by investigators at the University of Virginia to retreive,
    analyze, and share their chip data
  - used by public users to access and analyze gene chip data

This presentation illustrates the public user interface and how
public users can analyze gene chip data.  Specifically, it addresses:
  - how to create an Analysis Tree that analyzes others data
  - how to create an Analysis Tree to analyze your own data
  - how to view the results files
  - what each of the current analysis modules does and what their
    results mean

2
The UVa public server is at:

http:/biostat.virginia.edu/geoss/site

  - accounts may be requested via the "Request An Account" link
  - public user accounts are automatically generated and users may login
    immediately with their new account

3
Member Home

The "Member Home" page is the main menu for public users. There are four 
main activity areas:
  - Array Study Management
  - File Management
  - Analysis Management
  - Account Managment

  
4
View All Studies

The "View All Studies" link provides an overview of publically
accessible studies.  Users interested in viewing and analyzing data sets
made available by investigators should use this link as a starting
point.

- searching and sorting capabilities can be used to identify studies of
  interest
- clicking on the "Study Name" link will provide information on the
  source of the study  (typically the PubMed entry)
- clicking on "Full View" provides detailed information about a study,
  including the study abstract, the default GEOSS analysis results, and
  a short cut to creating your own analysis tree using the data from the
  study in question

5
File Management
The "View My Files" link allows the user to view and/or download files that
they have access to.  For public users, this is primarily analysis
results files.

- use the "Directories" section to navigate to the directory you wish to
  view.  Note that results files for each analysis tree are in their own
  directory
- use the "Files" section to view/download a file by clicking on the
  link in the "File" column

6
Analysis Trees

GEOSS analyses are called "Analysis Trees".  Each tree consists of one
or more analyses being performed on a set of input data.  In order to
create an analysis tree, we must define several items:

- the data source
- the data grouping
- the analyses to perform, including their order and parameters


7
Data Sources

There are three possible data sources available to public users:

1) Array Study
A study that is already defined in the system and has been made
viewable by public users.  The data is already loaded and the chips have
been grouped into conditions.

2) Analysis Set
A customized grouping of chips into conditions, and conditions into
sets.  The chip data may have been uploaded by the public user or may be
obtained from data others have made available to public users.

3) UVa Public Data     
UVa Array Studies that have been made publically available.  The data is
already loaded and the chips have been grouped into conditions.

8
Creating a Tree

Trees can be created using the "Create/Run a new analysis tree"
- provide a unique name
- specify a default structure (we recommend starting with the default
  structure and modifying it as needed)
- designate a source type and then click "Choose Source"
- pick the specific source then click "Next"

9
Refining a tree

The "Edit Analysis Tree" page allows you to refine the tree stucture.
You can:

- Change the tree name
- Add/Remove modules
- Set the parameters for each node
- View help for a particular node

When you have completed tree configuration, you may run the tree by
clicking "Run Analysis"

10
Tree Result Files

Tree result files can be viewed via the "View My Files" link.
Alternatively, several short cuts to tree results are provided:
- the "View tree files" link from Edit Analysis Tree
- the "View Analysis Result Files" from the Full View inside the Study
  Viewer
- the "file repository" link from "Run Analysis Tree"

11
Advanced Data Preparation

The Advanced Data Preparation links allow users to specify their own
grouping.  This allows them to use their own data or to specify
customized grouping of others data.

You must upload your own data prior to grouping and analyzing it.  

12 
Upload external array data file or a criteria file

To upload data use the  "Upload external array data file or a criteria 
file" link.  

  - currently, only data files generated using mas5 or GCOS may be
    uploaded
  - specify the data file to upload
  - specify the chip type associated with the data file
  - provide a unique, meaningful name for the chip data

Click on "Upload", to upload the data.  Note that if you are uploading
large data files, there may be some delays associated with this action.

Currently public users can only load chips individually.  Development is
underway to make the multi-chip load functionality available to public
users.

13
Grouping Terminology

Analysis Condition - a grouping of several chips into one condition.
Chips in the same condition should be either biological or technical
replicates.  As such, they will have the same chip layout.  There must
be one or more chips in each condition.

Analysis Set - a grouping of an Analysis Conditions.  There must be two
or more conditions in an analysis set.

14

Building an Analysis Condition

The "Create new analysis condition" link can be used to build an
analysis condition.

Hybridizations can be specified from a variety of sources:
  - uploaded hybridizations are accessible from choosing
    "Hybridizations" as the source
  - multiple hybridizations can be added at once by choosing one of the
    other option.  For instance, choosing studies as a source would add
    an all conditions associated with a specific study to the analysis
    condition
  - criteria files can be used to select hybridizations to add based on
    specified critieria.  For instance, your criteria file might specify
    the gender and age associated with a set of hybridizations.  You
    could then specify a condition that contains only samples taken from
    males over 50.

15

Building an Analysis Set

The "Create new analysis set" link can be used to build an analysis set.

Again, several sources are available:

- if you select "Analysis Conditions" as the source, you can choose the
  conditions you just created to be included in the set
- other options provide short cuts.  For instance, if you choose an
  entire study, the system will automatically build the analysis
  conditions for you and you can refine those conditions as appropriate

As discussed earlier, "Analysis Sets" are one of the possible inputs to
a tree.  The newly created set can now be analyzed.       
  
16

Example:  Analyze your own data

1) Upload each chip file using "Upload an external array data file or
criteria file
2) Group all the chips in to analysis conditions using "Create new
analysis condition"
3) Group all the analysis conditions together into an analysis set using
"Create new set of conditions"
4) Click on "Create tree using this Set"
5) Run the tree
6) View the results via "View my files"

17

Example: Get analysis results from public data
1) Use "View all studies" to find a study of interest
2) Click on "Full View" for detail on the study.  Use "View Analysis
Result File" to see the default analysis results for the study.
3) If you wish to create a customized tree, provide a name and 
click on "Create Customized Data Set for Analysis" from the full view.
4) Customize set and conditions
5) Click on "Create tree using this Set"
6) Run the tree
6) View the results via "View my files"

18
Account Management

These links provide the ability to modify account settings including:
  - personal info (email address)
  - password
  - other users in your group who may see your data


19
Conclusion

It is not necessary to download GEOSS in order to use the public
service.  However if you are interested in installing your own version
of GEOSS to support an array center processing chip data, GEOSS can be
obtained from:

http://sourceforge.net/projects/geoss/

Questions can be sent to:
  teela-geoss@peff.net


