GEOSS 2.5.0 Release Item:

The purpose of this document is to describe prospective additions to GEOSS
for the 2.5.0 release.  Most items have been chosen with the intention of 
improving public users services.  This document discussed enhancements in 
the following areas:  general enhancements, analysis functionality, UVa 
public data, supported data types, and public user analysis of foreign 
data sets.  

Section 1 is essentially a task list.  In Section 2, I provide some
notes/thoughts on the implementation of each task and time estimates for tasks
that I understand well enough to provide a meaningful estimate for.


Section 1 - Enhancement Descriptions
------------------------------------

General Enhancements: 

1.  Improve description of services offered on the home page for our public
server.  The improved description is intended to offer prospective users
information about on how they can use GEOSS if they request a public account.
This information should include information on the number of public data sets
available for analysis and the types of analyses that can be performed (or
statistics that can be obtained).


Public User Analysis of Foreign Data Sets: (200 hrs)

1. Acquire public data sets to load onto biostat

2. Add a default public user who owns public data sets

3. Study Viewer
    
   The study viewer provides information on a specific study.  There will be
   two modes: condensed and full.  Condensed views are intended for use when
   multiple studies are being displayed.  Full view provides all available
   information on a study.

   The study viewer works in conjunction with the study finder.  The study
   finder returns rows of condensed view studies. 

   Condensed view includes:
     - study name
     - investigator
     - short description
     - organism
     - chip type
     - number of chips
     - link to full view
     
   Full view includes:
     - all condensed view items
     - long description
     - description of conditions and replicates
     - miame information if available
     - link to default analysis
     - link to external articles
     - link to external data source
     - short cut to "build a customized tree"

4.  Study Finder
The study finder works in conjunction with the study viewer and is used to
control the order and selection of studies to view (in condensed study
format).  The finder allows the user to sort on any of the columns.  In
addition, the study finder allows users to restrict the set of studies
displayed by searching on the following criteria:
     - study name
     - investigator
     - organism / species
     - data type (mas5, cDNA)


5. Study finder extension
The extension allows users to restrict the displayed studies according to
gene.  



UVa Public Data Service: (50 hrs)

1. Change the public data page that contains UVa data sets to use the new
study viewer/study finder.

2. Modify the UVa public data service to increase flexibility in type of file
published (i.e. include CAB file, Excel files, user uploaded files).

3. Manually load current public data sets that are published but not part of
GEOSS so that they can be used for analysis. 



Analysis Functionality: (60 hrs)

1.  Modify analysis tree processing to check for known error conditions prior
to running the analysis (these include duplicate chips, insufficient number of
conditions, etc.). (Bug 343).

2.  Enhance analysis error reporting.  Specifically, error messages from Rout
should be returned to user.  Additionally, cc the analysis failed message
directly to the administrator so that they can better assist users.

3.  Upgrade to R 2.1.  Current analyses need to be upgraded to R 2.1 to
support future R development.

4.  New analyses - HyungJun/Jae to add this section


Supported Data Types (? hrs)

1. Expand supported data types to include cDNA data.  We will not
support array center processing of cDNA data, but would support upload of cDNA
through file upload and bulk upload.  This will provide the ability to analyze
cDNA data data sets. 




Section 2 - Implementation Notes
--------------------------------

General Enhancements:

1.  Improve description of services offered on the home page for our public
server.  

This can be done using our customized install options just following our
release.  All we need to do is agree on the text.  Time estimate: 1 hr.


Public User Analysis of Foreign Data Sets:

1.  Acquire public data sets to load onto biostat
I'm not certain how long it will take to gather the necessary files, however,
once the files are here we should do the following:
- load the data using geoss_bulk_load functionality
- review the data to ensure correct loading
- run default analysis tree

Time Estimate:
2 hrs per study if no errors in analysis or data load
4-8 hrs per study if there are errors

2.  Add a default public user who owns public data sets
- Modify geoss_initialize to add a public user
- Modify the user add code to automatically add all users to the public user
  group
- Add public user to existing installed systems
- Add everyone to the public users group on installed systems
- Add a confirmation when creating an order of type public that states that
  order data will be available to all users.  This will provide a safeguard
  against array center staff accidentally creating a publicly viewable order. 

Time Estimate:
16 hours

3. Study Viewer

- create a "View all Studies" link from member home
- build the html/pl files for viewer (condensed and full)
- modify user documentation to describe the new viewer
- database modifications:
   -  add default_tree_pk to study
- modify order load to run a default tree as soon as the study data is loaded

??s
- do we want to present any summary statistics in the viewer?  If so, we will
  need to write a function to extract summary statistics from default results
  files.  We would need to modify the db to store summary statistics (new
  table linked to tree?) and modify runtree.pl to populate the summary
  statistics after tree is finished running.  The full viewer would need to be
  modified to display summary statistics.  

Time Estimate - 60 hrs

4.  Study Finder
- modify the study viewer to have sortable columns
- modify the study viewer to filter by specified fields

Time Estimate - 16 hrs

5. Study finder extension
The extension allows users to restrict the displayed studies according to
gene.  

Time Estimate: ?


UVa Public Data Service:

1. Change the public data page that contains UVa data sets to use the new
study viewer/study finder.

2. Modify the UVa public data service to increase flexibility in type of file
published (i.e. include CAB file, Excel files, user uploaded files).

3. Manually load current public data sets that are published but not part of
GEOSS so that they can be used for analysis. 

- modify either the miame table or the indexrec file that is created to
  include all fields required by the study viewer
- link to the study viewer
- write utilities to save and load miame records for easier transfer of study
  data between different servers
- modify the publish to link to all specified files instead of the strictly
  defined subset
    
Time Estimate: 1-2: 30 hrs  3: 20 hrs



Analysis Functionality:

1.  Modify analysis tree processing to check for known error conditions prior
to running the analysis (these include duplicate chips, insufficient number of
conditions, etc.). (Bug 343).

2.  Enhance analysis error reporting.  Specifically, error messages from Rout
should be returned to user.  Additionally, cc the analysis failed message
directly to the administrator so that they can better assist users.

3.  Upgrade to R 2.1.  Current analyses need to be upgraded to R 2.1 to
support future R development.

4.  New analyses - HyungJun/Jae to add this section

Time Estimate for 1-3:  60 hrs



Supported Data Types

1. Expand supported data types to include cDNA data.  We will not
support array center processing of cDNA data, but would support upload of cDNA
through file upload and bulk upload.  This will provide the ability to analyze
cDNA data data sets. 

- obtain test cDNA data sets
- modify upl_data1.pl to allow cDNA files
- ensure that cDNA files are accessible from "View my files" and have uploaded
  correctly
- resolve the best way to store cDNA data
    - option 1 - make a way to load cDNA layouts
    - option 2 - add a probe_set_id field to the am_spots_cDNA - if each cDNA
      file has a distinct layout, we might as well store the probe_set_id with
      the data
    - option 3 - automatically create a layout from the data file named after
      the study - we would need to modify select_arraylayout so that it
      doesn't display custom layouts in edit_order
- modify the database in accordance with the storage solution
- create the appropriate load functions in geoss_session_lib.pl

Time Estimate(?)
